# DOM Events[^1]

## DOM communicates to JavaScript with Events

### Event types

- Mouse-related: mouse movement, button click, enter/leave element
- Keyboard-related: down, up, press
- Focus-related: focus in, focus out (blur)
- Input field changed, Form submitted
- Timer events
- Miscellaneous:
  - Content of an element has changed
  - Page loaded/unloaded
  - Image loaded
  - Uncaught exception
  
## Event handling

### Must specify 3 things when creating an event handler

- **What happened**: the event of interest.
- **Where it happened**: an element of interest.
- **What to do**: JavaScript to invoke when the event occurs on the element.

## Specifying the JavaScript of an Event


- Option #1: in the HTML:

  ```xhtml
  <div onclick="gotMouseClick('id42'); gotMouse=true;">...</div>
  ```
  
- Option #2: from Javascript using the DOM:

  ```javascript
  element.onclick = mouseClick;
  // or
  element.addEventListener("click", mouseClick);
  ```
    
- Example of the listener/emitter design pattern

## Event object

- Event listener functions passed an Event object

  Typically sub-classed MouseEvent, KeyboardEvent, etc.

- Some Event properties:

  type - The name of the event ('click', 'mouseDown', 'keyUp', ...) 
  
  timeStamp - The time that the event was created
  
  currentTarget - Element that listener was registered on
  
  target - Element that dispatched the event

## MouseEvent and KeyboardEvent

- Some MouseEvent properties (prototype inherits from Event)

  button - mouse button that was pressed
  
  pageX, pageY: mouse position relative to the top-left corner of document 
  
  screenX, screenY: mouse position in screen coordinates

- Some KeyboardEvent properties (prototype inherits from Event) 

  keyCode: identifier for the keyboard key that was pressed (Not necessarily an ASCII character!)
  
  charCode: integer Unicode value corresponding to keypress, if there is one.

## Draggable Rectangle - HTML/CSS

  ```xhtml
    <style type="text/css">
    #div1 {
      position: absolute;
    }
    </style>
    ...
    <div id="div1" onmousedown="mouseDown(event);"
        onmousemove="mouseMove(event);"
        onmouseup="mouseUp(event);">Drag Me!</div>
  ```

## Draggable Rectangle -JavaScript

  ```javascript
    var isMouseDown = false;  // Dragging?
    var prevX, prevY;
    
    function mouseDown(event) { 
      prevX = event.pageX; 
      prevY = event.pageY; 
      isMouseDown = true;
    }
    
    function mouseUp(event) { 
      isMouseDown = false;
    }
    
    function mouseMove(event) { 
      if (!isMouseDown) {
        return; 
        }
         var elem = document.getElementById("div1");
         elem.style.left = (elem.offsetLeft + (event.pageX - prevX)) + "px"; 
         elem.style.top = (elem.offsetTop + (event.pageY - prevY)) + "px"; 
      prevX = event.pageX;
      prevY = event.pageY; 
    }
  ```
  
## Deciding which handler(s) are invoked for an event?

Complicating factor: elements can contain or overlap other elements

Suppose user clicks with the mouse on "xyz" in:

  ```xhtml
  <body>
    <table> 
      <tr>
        <td>xyz</td> 
      </tr>
    </table>
  </body>
  ```

If handlers exist on the td, tr, table, and body elements which get called?
- Sometimes only the innermost element should handle the event
- Sometimes it's more convenient for an outer element to handle the event

## Capturing and Bubbling Events

- Capture phase (or "trickle-down"):

    ```javascript
    element.addEventListener(eventType, handler, true);
    ```
    
  - Start at the outermost element and work down to the innermost nested element.
  - Each element can stop the capture, so that its children never see the event
  
    ```javascript
    event.stopPropagation() 
    ```
    
- Bubble phase - Most on handlers (e.g. onclick) use bubble, not onfocus/blur

    ```javascript
    element.addEventListener(eventType, handler, false);
    ```
    
  - Invoke handlers on the innermost nested element that dispatches the event (mostly right thing)
  - Then repeat on its parent, grandparent, etc. Any given element can stop the bubbling:
  
    ```javascript
    event.stopPropagation() 
    ```
  
- Handlers in the bubble phase more common than capture phase

## Example: Timer Events

- Run myfunc once, 5 seconds from now (function is called in specified number of milliseconds)

    ```javascript
    token = setTimeout(myFunc, 5*1000); 
    ```

- Run myfunc every 50 milliseconds

    ```javascript
    token = setInterval(myfunc, 50); 
    ```

- Cancel a timer

    ```javascript
    clearInterval(token);
    ```

- Used for animations, automatic page refreshes, etc.

## Event Concurrency

- Events are serialized and processed one-at-a-time

- Event handling does not interleave with other Javascript execution.
  - Handlers run to completion
  - No multi-threading.
  
- Make reasoning about concurrency easier
  - Rarely need locks.
  
- Background processing is harder than with threads

## Event-based programming is different

- Must wait for someone to invoke your code.

- Must return quickly from the handler (otherwise the application will lock up).

- Key is to maintain control through events: make sure you have declared enough handlers; last resort is a timer.

- Node.js uses event dispatching engine in JavaScript for server programming


[^1]: [Stanford Computer Science](https://cs.stanford.edu)
